---
title: Symmetries of the Universe
author: Andrea Idini
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=1397
categories:
  - Ph.Me

---
You get "right" one thing, even though a bit naively:  
Universe is bound toghether by symmetries (and thus operators).  
The breaking of symmetries consist of "charges" or "quantum number" for the Noether Theorem, conserving symmetries determines the conservation laws and the balance between the two give the physical laws of the universe.

So the conservation law of momentum is a consequence of the invariance of physical system over traslation.  
The conservation of energy comes indeed from the fact that the physics system are invariant by traslation over time.  
and so on for the angular momenta conservation, or for less naive conservation laws like quantum isospin number or charge, parity...etc...

So does the breaking of this symmetries imply a non-conservation, in other term the arising of a charge.  
E.g. the electric charge comes from the breaking of the symmetries (U(1)) of the electromagnetic laws of Maxwell equation (and the QED version in quantum field mechanics). The photon is the so called "gauge boson" of the electromagnetic field, as every force carrier and arise from the symmetric structure of space-time when a breaking of gauge symmetry of the electromagnetic field generates a charge at some point at the space-time.

Same thing apply to every other force.

Why gravity is so weak is a yet unknown question, BUT if you account for asymptotic freedom (as a law that tend to restore the symmetry breaking of the Higgs Field for the mass), you have that the quark component e.g. of the proton are far less massive then the proton itself (roughly 10 MeV/c^2 vs 1000 MeV/c^2) and maybe can be even considered massless in a order 0 approach to the QCD, you have that gravity and mass is a far differend kind of beast than the other three force (where, for Einstein-Lorentz's E=mc^2 and medium polarization effects the sum of the masses/charges...etc... for bound composite systems is LESS then the sum of the components).

Strings theories try to account for that hidden in extra dimensions and where gravity can be an emergent properties of (again) the symmetry breaking of extra-dimensions.

For me: too easy way out, to hard way to compute nature have given proof to be more subtle.

The answer can be hidden in the fact that, except for electrons, everything we're observing, even quarks, are far bigger than the natural unit of lengh (h), and maybe we're just scratching the surface as our ancestors were doing seeing the first very weak effects of electric charge (against the very very strong, in absolute value, effect of the gravity force).

Gravity can come from a deeper symmetries than the one encontered before, one so deep that the nature try to balance it (as it balance so effectively e-m force when you take macroscopic neutral object: the energy needed to remove all the electron from a person (i.e. the energy that a person full charged will have) is bigger than the energy of the gravity in planet Earth.)

Per aspera ad Astra.  
dott. A. Idini